Alastair Budge: Hello, hello, hello, and welcome to the first, the inaugural, members-only English
Learning for Curious Minds podcast.
Let me just start by saying a big thank you for your ongoing membership.
The podcast wouldn't be possible without your support and every one of you is the reason that I do
the show.
I guess that most of you should know who I am by now, but just in case you need a reminder, I'm
Alastair Budge.
I'm the host of the podcast and the founder of Leonardo English.
Today we are going to talk about something that I think is pretty important when learning English,
or any language for that matter, but that a lot of people don't fully appreciate.
And that thing is the dictionary.
Today it is time to talk about how to use a dictionary properly as part of your English learning
toolkit.
And this isn't just going to be a list of the best dictionaries where afterwards you can go away
with a shopping list of dictionaries to buy or apps to download.
But I will give you a few hints on that front.
Oh no.
Today we are going to talk about how to use a dictionary properly.
On one level you might think it's pretty self-explanatory.
You look up the meanings of words you don't know and that you can't figure out through context and
whether it's a huge, big paper one that you have sitting on your desk, a mini one that you keep in
your pocket if you're out and about, if it's an app on your phone or even Google Translate, the
purpose of a dictionary is pretty simple.
It tells you the meanings of words, and yes, of course at a basic level, this is correct.
But this would be like looking at one of the cars used in a James Bond film and thinking, well, it's
probably quite a good car to go and get some shopping in.
Yes, of course it can do that, but if you think of it purely in these terms, then you're missing out
on a huge amount that will really help you get the most out of using a dictionary and help you
increase your vocabulary, be a more effective learner, and ultimately improve your English faster
than you might do otherwise.
So firstly, let's look at the different types of dictionaries that you can use, as this is actually
quite an important choice for you to make.
When learning English, or when learning any language really, you can choose either a monolingual
dictionary or a bilingual dictionary.
In case you don't know what those words mean, a monolingual dictionary means that the meaning of an
English word will be explained in English, while with a bilingual dictionary, the meaning will be
explained in another language, in your mother tongue.
For beginners and for anyone who is up to about an intermediate level, a bilingual dictionary is
normally preferred.
This is because with a monolingual dictionary, if you can't understand the words in the definition,
well, life is going to be pretty difficult.
Good monolingual dictionaries should always use simple words in the explanation of a more
complicated word, but even though they do this, it'll always be harder than if there was a
translation given in your mother tongue.
But for language learners of intermediate level and above, both bilingual and monolingual
dictionaries can be used.
And it just depends on personal preference.
All of you, I believe, should be at an intermediate level and above, and so you can choose which one
you prefer.
Now there are different views on this, and once people decide that they prefer one particular type,
it's normally quite hard to change their mind.
People are pretty stuck in their ways and internet forums are full of people arguing one way or the
other.
Monolingual dictionaries are normally preferred in academic institutions such as university.
When I was at university, for example, studying French and Italian, we were forced to use
monolingual dictionaries.
The reason for this is that as we are already at a decent enough level to learn new vocabulary in
context, and the theory was that we should be exposed to as much of the target languages as
possible, that we should be thinking, writing, reading, dreaming in that language in a real state of
total immersion.
So that was why we were made to use monolingual dictionaries.
But there are those that say that they really don't like monolingual dictionaries, saying that they
make the process of finding the meaning of a word much harder and more time-consuming, and what this
does is it distracts from the flow of reading or listening in the target language.
Steve Kaufman, the famous polyglot and founder of thelinguist.com says that he finds that
monolingual dictionaries slow him down, and therefore in the long run they reduce the amount of
exposure he has to what he calls meaningful content.
So his view is that monolingual dictionaries are less efficient and actually that the net effect on
language learning is negative.
So he doesn't like them at all, and he prefers a bilingual dictionary.
This podcast could go on for hours, days, even if I went through all of the arguments for and
against bilingual or monolingual dictionaries, and at the end of the day, it just depends on what
you're most comfortable with.
It also doesn't have to be an either or situation.
You can use both, and given that there are so many fantastic free dictionaries available online, you
will find out what works for you.
All of the definitions in the key vocabulary for the English Learning for Curious Minds podcast, as
you will know, are given in English, as we want to be an intensive English only resource.
However, of course, you can make up your own list in your own language or look up any word in a
bilingual dictionary if the definition provided in English isn't sufficiently clear.
And naturally as your English level improves and your vocabulary increases, you'll find it easier
and easier to use a monolingual dictionary if you so choose.
Okay, so the choice of what type of dictionary to use, either monolingual or bilingual is up to you.
How you actually use a dictionary though is something that lots of people don't get right, meaning
that they end up looking up the meaning of a particular word there and then, but then they don't
really do anything more to try to actually cement that word in their memory.
Meaning that when they come across the word later on, whether that's a day, a week, or a month
later, they really struggle to recall what it means.
So what they do is they just look it up, they solve the immediate problem, but there's no long-term
strategy around how to actually remember that word.
And this is where a few of the techniques that I'm going to share with you today can really help.
So let's give ourselves a real life example.
Let's say I come across the word 'sufficiently', which we actually had thirty seconds back.
One mistake that people make related to looking up vocabulary in a dictionary is to immediately
reach for the dictionary as soon as they find a word they don't know, and this is actually a big
mistake.
The dictionary should be your last resort only if you can't understand the word through context.
There's a lot of academic research that suggests that you are more likely to remember a word if
you've understood the definition through context instead of just immediately looking it up in a
dictionary.
So what you should do is wait until the rest of the sentence or just give it a bit more time and
then you may well be able to understand the meaning of the word contextually.
Learning to use context to understand words is also a big, big skill in itself, and this probably
calls for a standalone podcast on the topic.
You'll know that lots of polyglots and people who are able to speak multiple languages learn
languages faster than people who can't, and one of the reasons for this is that they are very good
at understanding meanings contextually.
And yes, learning to use context to understand words is this huge skill, so I think we will probably
do a podcast on that later on.
However, you can't understand everything through context and if you've tried but haven't managed,
here's where our dictionary comes into play.
So I could just look up the word in a dictionary, either a monolingual or bilingual one and find out
the meaning.
And that's what most people do.
For most people, it stops there.
They do nothing more than just solve the problem of not understanding that word there and then and
they don't do anything more to try and remember the word.
Just finding the meaning of a word so that you can move on and understand the rest of the article,
chapter or podcast is an okay strategy if you're just rushing through it.
But if your objective is to actually continually build your vocabulary and improve your lexicon,
then there are a few things that you really need to be doing with the dictionary in order to
maximise your chances of remembering that word.
Assuming that you don't have a photographic memory, then you probably won't be able to recall that
word that you've just taken the time to look up in a few weeks' time.
So here are a few things you can do.
Firstly, you should write the word down, of course, and write down the definition, either in your
own language or in English or both, if you're feeling particularly, particularly studious.
I've said elsewhere that every serious language student needs to have their own little black book,
their own little dictionary, and so you need to be constantly adding new words to it.
So when you find a new word, you should reach for your little black book and add that new word to
it.
But it doesn't just end here, you don't just write down the word, write down the definition, there
are quite a few more things that you should be doing to give yourself the best possible chance at
remembering that word.
So write down the word in context - write it down first in the context of how you came across it,
and then write it down in another context.
Good dictionaries will often have these other contexts and other examples that you can just jot
down, but you should also think about it yourself, create a sentence yourself and write that down.
Why?
Well because it's only through contextual repetition that you will give yourself the best chance of
remembering that particular word.
Some of us, and I'm certainly in this category, have very visual memories too, so to remember the
word you need to see it written down or you need to write it yourself.
My wife, for example, whenever she comes across a new word in English, she asks for it to be spelled
out for her as that's the way her brain works.
So you need to write it down, and write down the definition, and write down some sentences in
context.
But you should also practice saying it out loud and if you're comfortable with the phonetic
alphabet, write it down in IPA as well.
Why?
Well, for most people, they want to be able to recognise words when they are spoken and to be able
to pronounce them in the correct way.
They don't just need to be able to recognise them written down or to be able to write them.
We're not talking about reading and writing Latin here.
With all of these activities that you're doing as you're looking up these words in the dictionary,
the amazing thing that's happening is that you are actually just creating your own dictionary.
You are creating a dictionary of words that you have come across through being in contact with
English, a dictionary that you can revisit at any time, packed full of words that you can now
concentrate on memorising, or rather concentrate on not forgetting.
And words that are actually relevant to you, and they're relevant because you've come across them
naturally through coming into contact with English in your day-to-day life.
They are relevant to things that you are interested in to your life and to the kind of language that
you want to use to communicate.
So they're more relevant, you'll use them more frequently and therefore you're more likely to
remember them.
The title of this podcast is actually how to use a dictionary to learn English, but this is perhaps
a little deceptive.
The answer really is to use the dictionary to create your own mini dictionary.
One other dictionary that is certainly worth talking about is something that is both amazing and
terrible at the same time, and I guess a lot of you probably use it on a daily basis, and that is
Google Translate.
Google Translate is both the English learner's best friend and the English learner's worst enemy.
It's incredibly powerful and the translations of sentences and entire pieces of text can actually be
pretty good.
The Leonardo English blog, which I definitely recommend you checking out if you haven't already, has
a Spanish version that's powered entirely by Google Translate.
We're going to be adding more languages shortly, but at the moment, so that's as of January the 31st
there's just a Spanish one.
Google Translate also has some really cool functionality that I guess some of you will already be
familiar with, so things like you can take pictures of words with your phone and it will
automatically translate them, you can do handwriting, voice recognition, and all sorts of great
stuff.
If you're using Chrome on your mobile, you can even highlight a word and press translate to get it
Google Translated.
And every word has a speak out loud button, which is really handy for understanding how to pronounce
tricky words.
So don't get me wrong, it is a fantastic tool for lots and lots of use cases, but, and this is a big
but, Google Translate is no substitute for a dictionary, and when looking up single words, not in
context, it often falls short.
It often gives definitions that aren't correct in the context of a sentence.
English is a particularly difficult language for words that have multiple meanings based on the
context that they're in, and if you're looking up the definition of a word, Google Translate will
often provide a translation which is incorrect in the context of the word.
So long story short, don't use Google Translate as a bilingual dictionary.
My personal preference, and this works for English to the majority of the language pairs where
people are listening to this podcast is Word Reference.
I imagine some of you might use Word Reference already, but for those of you who don't, I'll just
explain exactly why I think it is the one to use.
So with Word Reference, you get a monolingual dictionary and a bilingual dictionary in one.
You can see the definition in English and your own language, plus you get several examples of the
word in context and synonyms in both languages.
So if you're looking for a dictionary that you can get online or as an app, Word Reference is
definitely an excellent option, although there are, of course, many others that do a pretty similar
thing.
So as I said, this podcast didn't have a huge list of dictionaries to buy or apps to download, but I
hope it has helped give you an idea of the kinds of things that you should be doing to use a
dictionary to its fullest potential.
And as with any advice on this podcast and any advice you get from anyone, you should always take it
with a pinch of salt.
You need to find out what works for you, and every language learner is different.
What I hope you have learned though, is that the dictionary can be a lot more powerful than just
telling you the meaning of a word.
A dictionary holds the keys to the building blocks of any language, and if you get into good habits
of using them in the most effective ways, you'll find yourself progressing far more quickly than if
you're just using them to quickly look up the meanings of words and move on.
So give it a go if you are not doing this already, trying looking words up in a dictionary in the
way that I suggested, test it out for a good chunk of time, at least two weeks, then let me know how
you get on.
I'd love to hear it.
I'll be doing exactly the same as I'm learning Spanish this year.
I didn't speak a word of Spanish at the start of 2020 and I'm making it my mission to learn it to at
least a B2 standard using only language acquisition tools so podcasts, reading articles, that kind
of stuff.
And of course I'll be using a dictionary in exactly the way that I've just spoken about.
Okay, that is it for today's inaugural English Learning for Curious Minds members-only podcast.
It's the first one we've released, and I'd love to know your feedback.
As always, please feel free to email hi@leonardoenglish.com.
For those of you who have emailed in, you'll know by now that I love hearing from each and every one
of you and read and respond to every single email that I get.
So I hope you will let me know what you think and if you have any questions about anything in this
podcast, then just fire away.
I've been Alastair Budge, and this has been the first English Learning for Curious Minds
members-only podcast.
I will catch you in the next episode.